---
layout: default
title: Measurable Functions
parent: Measure Theory
nav_order: 4
has_toc: true
---

# Navigation Structure
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}


# Measurable Functions

## TLDR

1. Measure functions map elements of a set to a number. Measurable functions are a mapping between elements of a $\sigma$-algebra to another, at least.

## Measurable Functions

Now that we have discussed what are measure functions, we move to integration. But the integration function $I(f)$ takes a function $f$ and produces an area under the curve in the Riemann sense. Understanding $\sigma$-algebras and measures helped build the mechanics behind the measurement process, i.e. integrating with respect to a measure. However, the other part the integral is $f$.

$f$ should be a **measurable function**. Recall a function is a mapping $f: X \to Y$ that induces another function $f^{-1}: Y\to X$. Namely, $f^{-1}(E) := \{x \in X : f(x) \in E\}$. This notation preserves under unions, intersections, and complements.

**Exercise**: Given $f: X\to Y$, Prove that $\cup_i f^{-1}(Y_i) = f^{-1}(\cup_i Y_i)$, and $\{f^{-1}(Y)\}^C = f^{-1}(Y^C)$. *Hint: Use the set representation of $f^{-1}$.*

Given two measurable spaces $(X,\mathcal{X}), (Y, \mathcal{Y})$, the function $f: X \to Y$ is **measurable** if $f^{-1}(E) \subseteq \mathcal{X}$ for $E \in \mathcal{Y}$. We call this function $f$ to be $\mathcal{X}/\mathcal{Y}$-measurable.

**Exercise**: If $f: A \to B$ is $\mathcal{A}/\mathcal{B}$-measurable and $g: B \to C$ is $\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{C}$-measurable, show that $f \circ g$ is $\mathcal{A}/\mathcal{C}$-measurable.

**Exercise**: Let $X, Y$ be any topological space. Prove that any continuous function $f:X\to Y$ is $\mathcal{B}_X/\mathcal{B}_Y$-measurable. *Hint: Continuity condition of $f$: the set $\{x : f(x) \in O\}$ is open for any open set $O$ in the image. Then recall Borel sets on a topological space is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by its respectful open sets.*

## Measurable Functions on Subsets

For a given function $f: X \to \mathbf{R}$ that is $\mathcal{X}/\mathcal{B}$-measurable, it is sufficient to check that $f^{-1}(\text{generating set}) \in \mathcal{X}$ to determine measurability. 

**Exercise**: Prove the above statement. That is, let $\mathcal{B} = \sigma(A)$. If the preimage condition $f^{-1}(A) \in \mathcal{X}$ holds, then for any $B \in \mathcal{B}$, the preimage also holds. *Hint: Prove that that $\{a \in A : f^{-1}(a) \in \mathcal{X}\}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra and it contains $A$, hence contains $\mathcal{B}$.*







